 Article IV Scanner TaxonomyInstructions: This taxonomy will be used to categorise Article IV reports by the themes listed below. The themes and individual words will be used to tag Article IV reports, making it easier for CSOs to find what they are looking for. Both the themes and individual words are important as they will reflect the areas the reports are categorised into (themes) and which individual reports are tagged for that area (words). Please leave comments recommending changes or additions to the wording and any additions to the themes.  1. Austerity 1.1 Fiscal discipline/Fiscal consolidation/Fiscal sustainability/Credible fiscal frameworks/Fiscal constraint/adjustment/cuts (used interchangeably, but all mean austerity measures)   Countries constrained by debt and deficits are told to adopt fiscal consolidation or austerity policies including on the revenue-side (e.g., reducing zero-rated VAT and other ‘tax expenditures’, or increasing VAT) and expenditure cuts - budget cuts, including through wage bills, and privatisation – a strategy to minimise the public sector and the welfare state to support the private sector. Tags: fiscal consolidation, austerity, fiscal adjustment, fiscal sustainability, credible fiscal frameworks, fiscal tightening, fiscal policy convergence, budget cuts, expenditure rationalization, debt constraint, deficit reduction, tax expenditure reform, public sector reduction, public financial management, wage bill rationalization, pension system reform, spending restraint, fiscal rule, structural reforms, streamline expenditures1.2 Wage Bill/Public Sector Wages/Civil Service    Reducing the wage bill by cutting the number and the salaries for teachers, health workers and local civil servants, as a component of national budgets. This can translate into salaries being reduced or eroded in real value at a time of high inflation, payments in arrears, hiring freezes and/or employment retrenchment. Tags: public wage freeze, civil service reform, hiring freeze, public employment, real wage erosion, wage bill control, salary adjustment freeze, salary cap,  1.3 Subsidies  Limiting or cutting/eliminating subsidies, predominantly on energy (fuel, electricity), food and agricultural inputs.  The IMF uses the terms “electricity tariff increases” or “cost-recovery in tariffs”.Tags: subsidy cuts, fuel subsidy reform, electricity subsidy, agricultural input subsidy, energy price reform, price liberalization, unbundling, deregulation 1.4. Privatisation, Commercialization, Reform of Public Services and State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), Public Divestiture   Privatising previously publicly owned services, including water, transport, energy, health, education, pensions and others. Expanding the private sector. Privatization is rarely used term given its negative connotations; most common term is “Reform of SOEs”. Sometimes not privatized but commercialized or corporatized, leaving them ready for privatization later on. Breaking up or ‘unbundling’ ie: selling off state owned enterprises,  particularly basic goods and services. The IMF also uses the terms ‘restructuring’ or ‘public divestiture’. Tags: SOE restructuring, commercialization, privatization, public divestiture, divestment, PPP, corporatization, unbundling, state asset sale, reform of SOEs, State Ownership Policy, equitization, liquidation. 1.5. Labour flexibilisation  These include restraining the minimum wage, limiting salary adjustments, decentralising, limiting or eliminating collective bargaining, increasing the ability of enterprises to fire employees, and making it easier to hire workers on temporary/atypical and precarious contracts. Use of informal workforce argument - i.e. ‘restrictive’ regulation contributes to labour informality and related tax revenue and productivity losses.Tags: labour market deregulation and liberalization or reform, minimum wage restraint, flexible contracts, collective bargaining reform, informality, informal sector, labour reform, precarious employment, employment flexibility, formalisation. Product market regulation or reform, productivity. 2. Tax2.1 Consumption taxes/VAT/Income tax/Wealth tax/Corporate tax  Increasing or expanding VAT rates or sales taxes or by removing exemptions are consumption-based taxes which are regressive – ie: they reduce poorer  households’ disposable income, which further exacerbates existing inequalities. In contrast, alternative progressive tax approaches should be considered, such as taxes on personal and corporate income, including on the financial sector, wealth, inheritance, property, digital services or ending ‘special economic zones’ and other tax exemptions/breaks to big corporations. Tags: VAT, VAT increase, regressive taxation, progressive tax reform, income tax, corporate tax, wealth tax, tax exemptions, tax base broadening, digital tax, tax fairness, domestic revenue mobilisation2.2 Tax Expenditures and Illicit Financial Flows (IFFs)Measures related to tax exemptions, holidays, investment incentives, and efforts to combat tax avoidance and evasion, including the role of tax treaties, harmful tax practices, and financial secrecy. Often includes reference to reducing base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS).Tags: tax incentives, tax expenditures, BEPS, illicit flows, secrecy jurisdictions, special economic zones, AML/CFT frameworks (anti-money laundering / counter financing of terrorism) 2.3 T​​ax Policies Favouring Financial CapitalTax systems that benefit financial investors over labor, including reduced capital gains tax, deferred tax credits, and loopholes supporting speculative activities.Tags: capital income taxation, capital gain taxation, tax deferral, financial speculation, tax loopholes, preferential tax treatment.  3. Climate and environment  3.1 Climate policies Encompass loss and damage, mitigation, and climate finance, such as the Resilience and Sustainability Trust or Fund (RST/RSF).  The IMF uses the terms ‘adaptation, mitigation, and transition management’. IMF policies can be linked to fossil fuel expansion in the oil sector and oil and gas sector. Tags: climate, climate change, climate shocks, climate finance, adaptation, mitigation, transition management, Resilience and Sustainability Trust, environmental policy, climate risk, green transition, carbon pricing, fossil fuel/s, oil sector, gas sector, hydrocarbon/s. 3.2 Land use, forests and natural resource management This includes policies related to land tenure, land reform, forest governance, agricultural land use, biodiversity, etc. Land is often discussed concerning climate mitigation/adaptation, or efforts to increase private capital mobilisation (PCM) in natural resource sectors. Such reforms often drive land privatisation and commodification, which drives land grabs, deforestation, etc. IMF uses language such as ‘property rights’, ‘natural capital’, or ‘nature-based solutions’.  Tags: land reform, property rights, natural capital, biodiversity, land tenure, forest governance, nature-based solutions, cadaster,  natural resources, land commodification, agroecology, deforestation, degradation, agricultural commodities, agriculture, forests, forestry, concessions or public license or public license registries, mining, oil. 4. Social and Gendered impacts  4.1 Gender policies/impact on women, girls, gender marginalised people Include those that impact women and girls and gender equality/inequality, such as gender based violence, access to sexual and reproductive health rights (SRHR), access to public services, education, health and social protection. It also relates to how the economy is gendered – unpaid care labour, gender pay gap, labour force participation, and care economies.  Tags: gender inequality; women's participation; gender pay gap; care economy; unpaid care work; SRHR, social norms; gender-based violence; female labour force participation (women); child marriage; primary, secondary, and tertiary education; maternal mortality; and adolescent fertility.4.2 Care Economy / Unpaid and Paid Care WorkPolicies impacting the provision, financing,  recognition and redistribution of care work, including unpaid care work by women, investment in care infrastructure (health, education, early childhood, elder care), and the design of fiscal and labour policies that (de)prioritise care economies.Tags: care economy, unpaid work, childcare, eldercare, recognition of unpaid work, investment in care services, maternity protection, maternity/paternity/parental leaves, disability care.4.3 Distributional impacts/social impactsMeasuring or assessing the impact of policies on different social and income groups.   Tags: inequality, poverty, distributional effects, inequality impact, social impact assessment, income distribution, poverty impact, vulnerable groups5. Social Services5.1 Social protection/Social safety net/ targeting/ targeted/ registry/ies  Rationalising/cutting spending on social assistance or safety nets to achieve cost savings, often by revising eligibility criteria and “targeting the poorest”, which in practice excludes the majority of the population including many low-income individuals and persons in or at risk of poverty. Oftentimes, the IMF uses the language of efficiency/efficiencies, rationalising or targeting programmes for children and families, women, the unemployed, older persons and persons with disabilities, as well as targeting scarce resources to only the extreme poor and vulnerable.  Tags: targeted transfers, social registry/ies, social transfers, social security, poverty targeting, cash transfer rationalization, social assistance reform, safety net efficiency, conditionality, social spending cuts 5.2 Pension/Social Security Reforms   Pension reforms can include raising workers’ contribution rates, decreasing employers’  social security contributions, reforming eligibility periods, reducing pension tax exemptions, prolonging the retirement age, lowering benefits, eliminating/penalising early retirement, freezing or lowering pension indexation below inflation levels, or modifying calculation formulas downwards. Though pensions are the main interest (given their large weight in the budget), there are also other social security reforms proposed, such as reforming family benefits, disability, unemployment support and others. Tags: pension reform, retirement age, social security contributions, benefit reduction, eligibility changes, pension indexation freeze, early retirement penalty 5.3 Social Security Contributions/Tax Wedge  Waiving or reducing employers’ social security contributions as a way to support business shifts workers’ deferred wages to employers. This is a highly regressive policy since these social security contributions belong to workers; they are a deferred wage of workers, part of their compensation. If employers’ contribution rates were waived/reduced, they must subsequently be increased again and all arrears paid back to social security, to ensure its sustainability and protect workers’ rights.  Tags: payroll tax relief, tax wedge reduction, employer contribution cuts, deferred wages, social security sustainability, contribution arrears 5.4 Fees for Public Services  This practice is prevalent in countries that have privatised or reformed their public services. Rate hikes may lead to goods and services being unaffordable for populations —this is particularly important for access to essential services such as water, education, health, energy and transport. Tags: user fees, cost recovery, tariff hikes, health copayments, education fees, public service charges, affordability barriers 5.5 Cuts to Health Expenditure/Rationalization/Efficiency      Include increased charges for health services, reductions in medical personnel, cost-saving measures in public healthcare centers, discontinuation of allowances, phase-out of treatments and services, and increased copayments for pharmaceuticals. Often, the IMF uses the language of efficiency/efficiencies and rationalising health and education, which means cuts. Public-Private Partnerships are also put forward as an investment in the healthcare sector.Tags: health, healthcare, health sector rationalization, health service fees, medical staff reduction, copayments, health PPPs, public health cuts, efficiency in health, healthcare budget.  5.6 Cuts to Education Expenditure/Rationalization/Efficiency   As above, these include privatisation of education, increased charges for education services, reductions in personnel, and cost-saving measures in public education.  Often, the IMF uses the language of efficiency/efficiencies and rationalising health and education, which means cuts. Tags: education, education rationalization, school privatization, education cost recovery, teacher reduction, education fees, public education cuts, efficiency in education, education budget6. Private and external sector 6.1 External sector/business-friendly environment and FDI (Foreign Direct Investment) A strategy which relies on creating a ‘business-friendly’ environment or strengthening the ‘external sector’ in order to attract investment– often involves deregulation, privatisation and labour flexibilisation, and a focus on primary exports and foreign currency reserves.  Tags: foreign direct investment, business climate, external sector strategy, regulatory reform, deregulation, export promotion, private sector-led growth, exchange rate flexibility, de-risking6.2 PPPs - Public Private Partnerships/Power Purchase Agreements There are many downsides to using PPPs, including their high costs, increased public and consumer spending, high, often hidden, contingent liabilities, efficiency issues and adverse impacts on workers. PPPs strengthen the private partner at the expense of the public partner, creating a public subsidy flow to the private sector and eliminating state capacity to cross-subsidise service delivery to non/less profitable areas/populations. This also includes policies and instruments which aim to de-risk private capital by shifting financial, regulatory or political risks from private to public, ie., guarantees, blended finance, etc. - for which the IMF uses terms such as 'financial incentives' or ‘reducing barriers/obstacles to private investments.’Tags: PPP, power purchase agreement, blended finance, public guarantees, private sector risk de-risking, contingent liabilities, infrastructure PPP, fiscal risk, public-private partnerships; low fee schools; private schools; non-state schools; non-government schools; vouchers; non-public schools.6.3 Foreign Currency Debt and External VulnerabilitiesIMF policies contribute indirectly to countries borrowing in foreign currencies (mostly US dollars). This makes them vulnerable to exchange rate changes, interest rate hikes, and other external shocks. For example, policies such as  keeping a fixed exchange rate (like a currency peg), can hurt exports, increase import dependency, and force countries to borrow from abroad to defend their currency; recommending raising interest rates to fight inflation, makes it more expensive to borrow domestically — pushing governments to borrow externally instead; promoting opening up to global financial markets, increases reliance on foreign lenders and risky bond markets.Tags: Foreign currency debt, Eurobond issuance, external debt sustainability, rollover risk, debt service burden, market access risk, currency mismatch, exchange rate volatility, external financing pressures. 7. Financialisation7.1 Deregulation of Financial MarketsPolicies facilitating the expansion of financial markets by removing regulatory constraints. Includes liberalization of capital accounts, growth of shadow banking, and the introduction of complex financial instruments with limited oversight.Tags: financial deregulation, capital controls, shadow banking, free capital flow, financial liberalization7.2 Monetary Policies Favouring Financial Sector GrowthMonetary policy can be used to stimulate financial markets (expansionary policies) through tools like low interest rates, quantitative easing, and liquidity provision, or to control inflation (contractionary policies) mainly by lowering interest rates. In LMICs IMF policies are much stricter on inflation control, aiming to lower inflation. High interest rates have the effect of making domestic borrowing more expensive(pushing governments toward borrowing in foreign currency) and to increase unemployment. Tags: Quantitative Easing (QE), long term refinancing operations (LTRO), low interest rates, liquidity injection, inflation targeting, financial sector bias, financial sector development, inflation targeting, interest rate hikes/rises, monetary tightening.7.3 Corporate Governance and Shareholder Value OrientationCorporate policies prioritizing shareholder returns through mechanisms such as dividends, stock buybacks, and executive compensation tied to share performance. Includes financialization of corporate strategy and structure.Tags: stock buybacks, executive pay, shareholder primacy, leveraged buyouts, short-termism7.4 Expansion of Credit and Debt MarketsPolicies and practices encouraging the growth of household and corporate debt, including through financial innovation and securitization. Encompasses risks associated with debt-driven growth models.Tags: credit growth, securitization, derivatives, mortgage-backed securities, household debt, corporate debt7.5 Financial inclusion A strategy used by the Fund to increase access to financial services, banking, and access to credit. Often put forward as a means to empower marginalised communities although critics point out that it can lead to increased indebtedness and furthers the encroachment of financial and profit driven actors rather than people’s rights to access goods and services. Tags: Financial inclusion, financial empowerment, financial services, banks, banking, credit, access to credit.8. Digitisation 8.1 Digitalisation/AI/platform economiesThe platform economy is one of the most significant manifestations of the changes induced by the digitalisation of the world of work. The growth of this economy has opened up new markets for businesses and created new jobs and income opportunities, often with high flexibility and low barriers of access for workers. The IMF sees itself as a key partner to policy-makers in helping them navigate the digital transition. Therefore, a big focus of the IMF’s work is on digital infrastructure, especially gov tech in tax administration, and on implementation of labor market policies to increase AI preparedness (see Gen-AI: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Work, IMF, January 2024).Tags: Platform economy/ies, online platforms, digital economy/ies, collaborative economy/ies,  peer-to-peer economy/ies, gig economy/ies, on-demand economy/ies, technology, technological developments, artificial intelligence (AI), digitisation, digital divide, jobs/work/labour, flexibility, informality, deregulation. Digital infrastructure, digital transition or transformation, connectivity9. Governance9.1 Governance/legal reformsThe IMF is concerned with countries’ institutions, administrative structures, governance, legal reforms and political systems which it claims are a barrier to successful implementation of reforms. Tags: Institutions, administration/administrative structures, governance, law, legal frameworks, reforms.9.2 Political economy The IMF is also increasingly concerned with public acceptance of reforms and undertakes evaluation of public sentiment which it often refers to as ‘political economy’, or ‘ownership’. This can include what the IMF calls ‘consultation’ or ‘engagement’ with stakeholders such as trade unions and civil society. Tags: Public sentiment, politics, political economy, ownership, education, consultation, engagement, stakeholders, trade unions, civil society, social acceptability of reforms, people-centered.  